docs/product/Get started/index.mdx, before:

---
title: ""
slug: /
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import DocCardList from '@theme/DocCardList';
import { CardLayout } from '@theme/DocCard';
import { useColorMode } from '@docusaurus/theme-common';

export const Logo = ({ lightSrc = '/img/logo_light.png', darkSrc = '/img/logo_dark.png', width, altText }) => {
  const { colorMode } = useColorMode();
  const logoSrc = colorMode === 'dark' ? darkSrc : lightSrc;
  return <img src={logoSrc} alt="{altText}" style={{ width: width || 'auto' }} />;
};

<p align="center">
    <Logo 
      lightSrc="/img/Logo_Portia_Symbol_Black.png"
      darkSrc="/img/Logo_Portia_Symbol_White.png"
      altText="Portia AI logo" 
      width="200px"
    />
</p>

<h1>Welcome to our docs!</h1>
Portia AI is an open source developer framework. We want to allow any developer to deploy agents that are transparent, steerable and authenticated.
<br/>Try out our product and give us some feedback on our <a href="https://discord.gg/DvAJz9ffaR" target="_blank">**Discord channel (↗)**</a>.<br/>

## Overview of Portia AI
The core product accessible in our <a href="https://github.com/portiaAI/portia-sdk-python" target="_blank">**Github repository (↗)**</a> 
is extensible with our complimentary cloud features which are aimed at making production deployments easier and faster.

With our open source capabilities you should be able to:
- Ingest a user query and leverage our system prompting to generate a structured plan.
- Run a plan, invoking tools and tracking the plan run state at every step.
- Build your own tools.
- Define clarifications to interrupt a plan run and solicit structured human / machine input when necessary, e.g. to handle required authentication or missing input.

Our cloud offering, which can be enabled from the <a href="https://app.portialabs.ai" target="_blank">**Portia dashboard (↗)**</a> 
works seamlessly with our open source library. It will give you the ability to:
- Store and retrieve plan run states and review historical plan runs.
- Invoke a library of cloud-hosted tools with authentication handled for you, and access tool call logs.

<p align="center">
    <Logo 
      lightSrc="/img/portia_architecture.png"
      darkSrc="/img/portia_architecture_dark.png"
      altText="Portia AI architecture" 
      width="800px"
    />
</p>

## Why Portia AI
We are beginning our journey as a developer framework by focusing on this problem set. Shout if you think we should add to this list :pray:

<table style={{ width: "100%", borderCollapse: "collapse" }}>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th style={{ width: "50%", verticalAlign: "top", padding: "8px", fontSize: "16px" }}>**Problem**</th>
      <th style={{ width: "50%", verticalAlign: "top", padding: "8px", fontSize: "16px" }}>**Portia's solution**</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td style={{ width: "50%", verticalAlign: "top", padding: "8px" }}>
        <strong>Planning:</strong> Many use cases require visibility into the LLM’s reasoning, 
        particularly for complex tasks requiring multiple steps and tools. 
        LLMs also struggle picking the right tools as their tool set grows.
      </td>
      <td style={{ width: "50%", verticalAlign: "top", padding: "8px" }}>
        <strong>Pre-expressed plans:</strong> Our open source, multi-shot prompter guides your LLM to 
        produce an explicit <a href="https://docs.portialabs.ai/generate-plan">Plan</a> in response to a prompt, 
        weaving the relevant tools, inputs, and outputs for every step.
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style={{ width: "50%", verticalAlign: "top", padding: "8px" }}>
        <strong>Execution:</strong> Tracking an LLM’s progress mid-task is difficult, making it 
        harder to intervene when guidance is needed. This is especially critical for enforcing 
        company policies or correcting hallucinations (hello, missing arguments in tool calls!)
      </td>
      <td style={{ width: "50%", verticalAlign: "top", padding: "8px" }}>
        <strong>Stateful, steerable agents:</strong> Portia will spin up a multi-agent
        plan to execute and track its state throughout execution via a 
        [`PlanRun`](https://docs.portialabs.ai/run-plan). Using our 
        [`Clarification`](https://docs.portialabs.ai/understand-clarifications) abstraction you can 
        define points where you want to take control of plan runs e.g. to resolve missing 
        information or multiple choice decisions. Portia serialises the plan run state, and you can 
        manage its storage / retrieval yourself or use our cloud offering for simplicity.
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style={{ width: "50%", verticalAlign: "top", padding: "8px" }}>
        <strong>Authentication:</strong> Existing solutions often disrupt the user experience 
        with cumbersome authentication flows or require pre-emptive, full access to every tool—an 
        approach that doesn’t scale for multi-agent assistants. 
      </td>
      <td style={{ width: "50%", verticalAlign: "top", padding: "8px" }}>
        <strong>Extensible, authenticated tool calling:</strong> Bring your own tools on our 
        extensible [`Tool`](https://docs.portialabs.ai/intro-to-tools) abstraction, or use 
        our growing plug and play authenticated 
        [tool library](https://docs.portialabs.ai/run-portia-tools), which will include a number of 
        popular SaaS providers over time (Google, Zendesk, Hubspot, Github etc.). All Portia tools 
        feature just-in-time authentication with token refresh, offering security without 
        compromising on user experience.
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Alright let's roll our sleeves up and get you spinning up them agents :robot:! Next up we'll install 
the SDK locally and validate your setup, before creating a Portia cloud account.

<details open style={{
  backgroundColor: "rgba(128, 0, 128, 0.1)",
  borderLeft: "5px solid purple",
  padding: "10px",
  borderRadius: "5px",
  margin: "10px 0"
}}>
  <summary style={{ color: "5D3FD3", fontWeight: "bold", cursor: "pointer" }}>
    🎉 I'm feeling lucky
  </summary>
  <p>If you prefer to just dive right into an example, why not head over to the intro example in our <a href="https://github.com/portiaAI/portia-agent-examples/blob/main/get_started_google_tools/README.md" target="_blank">**examples repo (↗)**</a>.</p>
</details>

## Setup and configuration

<div style={{ display: "flex", flexWrap: "nowrap", overflow: "visible", gap: "16px", width: "100%" }}>
    <div style={{ width: "33%" }}>
      <CardLayout
        href="/install"
        icon=""
        title="Install and setup"
        description="Get setup and run a query."
      />
    </div>
    <div style={{ width: "34%" }}>
      <CardLayout
        href="/setup-account"
        icon=""
        title="Set up a Portia account"
        description="Sign up for a Portia cloud account."
      />
    </div>
    <div style={{ width: "33%" }}>
      <CardLayout
        href="/manage-config"
        icon=""
        title="Manage your config"
        description="Learn how to configure your Portia." 
      />
    </div>
</div>

Commit message:

Remote MCP update: tweaks to pages, renamings etc (#160)
* Tweaks to pages, renamings etc

* Renaming

* Rename page and fix links

* Rename file

docs/product/Get started/index.mdx, after:

---
title: ""
slug: /
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import DocCardList from '@theme/DocCardList';
import { CardLayout } from '@theme/DocCard';
import { useColorMode } from '@docusaurus/theme-common';

export const Logo = ({ lightSrc = '/img/logo_light.png', darkSrc = '/img/logo_dark.png', width, altText }) => {
  const { colorMode } = useColorMode();
  const logoSrc = colorMode === 'dark' ? darkSrc : lightSrc;
  return <img src={logoSrc} alt="{altText}" style={{ width: width || 'auto' }} />;
};

<p align="center">
    <Logo 
      lightSrc="/img/Logo_Portia_Symbol_Black.png"
      darkSrc="/img/Logo_Portia_Symbol_White.png"
      altText="Portia AI logo" 
      width="200px"
    />
</p>

<h1>Welcome to our docs!</h1>
Portia AI is an open source developer framework. We want to allow any developer to deploy agents that are transparent, steerable and authenticated.
<br/>Try out our product and give us some feedback on our <a href="https://discord.gg/DvAJz9ffaR" target="_blank">**Discord channel (↗)**</a>.<br/>

## Overview of Portia AI
The core product accessible in our <a href="https://github.com/portiaAI/portia-sdk-python" target="_blank">**Github repository (↗)**</a> 
is extensible with our complimentary cloud features which are aimed at making production deployments easier and faster.

With our open source capabilities you should be able to:
- Ingest a user query and leverage our system prompting to generate a structured plan.
- Run a plan, invoking tools and tracking the plan run state at every step.
- Build your own tools.
- Define clarifications to interrupt a plan run and solicit structured human / machine input when necessary, e.g. to handle required authentication or missing input.

Our cloud offering, which can be enabled from the <a href="https://app.portialabs.ai" target="_blank">**Portia dashboard (↗)**</a> 
works seamlessly with our open source library. It will give you the ability to:
- Store and retrieve plan run states and review historical plan runs.
- Invoke tools from remote MCP servers and other cloud-hosted applications, with authentication handled for you.
- Access the tool call logs of your plan runs.

<p align="center">
    <Logo 
      lightSrc="/img/portia_architecture.png"
      darkSrc="/img/portia_architecture_dark.png"
      altText="Portia AI architecture" 
      width="800px"
    />
</p>

## Why Portia AI
We are beginning our journey as a developer framework by focusing on this problem set. Shout if you think we should add to this list :pray:

<table style={{ width: "100%", borderCollapse: "collapse" }}>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th style={{ width: "50%", verticalAlign: "top", padding: "8px", fontSize: "16px" }}>**Problem**</th>
      <th style={{ width: "50%", verticalAlign: "top", padding: "8px", fontSize: "16px" }}>**Portia's solution**</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td style={{ width: "50%", verticalAlign: "top", padding: "8px" }}>
        <strong>Planning:</strong> Many use cases require visibility into the LLM’s reasoning, 
        particularly for complex tasks requiring multiple steps and tools. 
        LLMs also struggle picking the right tools as their tool set grows.
      </td>
      <td style={{ width: "50%", verticalAlign: "top", padding: "8px" }}>
        <strong>Pre-expressed plans:</strong> Our open source, multi-shot prompter guides your LLM to 
        produce an explicit <a href="https://docs.portialabs.ai/generate-plan">Plan</a> in response to a prompt, 
        weaving the relevant tools, inputs, and outputs for every step.
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style={{ width: "50%", verticalAlign: "top", padding: "8px" }}>
        <strong>Execution:</strong> Tracking an LLM’s progress mid-task is difficult, making it 
        harder to intervene when guidance is needed. This is especially critical for enforcing 
        company policies or correcting hallucinations (hello, missing arguments in tool calls!)
      </td>
      <td style={{ width: "50%", verticalAlign: "top", padding: "8px" }}>
        <strong>Stateful, steerable agents:</strong> Portia will spin up a multi-agent
        plan to execute and track its state throughout execution via a 
        [`PlanRun`](https://docs.portialabs.ai/run-plan). Using our 
        [`Clarification`](https://docs.portialabs.ai/understand-clarifications) abstraction you can 
        define points where you want to take control of plan runs e.g. to resolve missing 
        information or multiple choice decisions. Portia serialises the plan run state, and you can 
        manage its storage / retrieval yourself or use our cloud offering for simplicity.
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style={{ width: "50%", verticalAlign: "top", padding: "8px" }}>
        <strong>Authentication:</strong> Existing solutions often disrupt the user experience 
        with cumbersome authentication flows or require pre-emptive, full access to every tool—an 
        approach that doesn’t scale for multi-agent assistants. 
      </td>
      <td style={{ width: "50%", verticalAlign: "top", padding: "8px" }}>
        <strong>Extensible, authenticated tool calling:</strong> Bring your own tools on our 
        extensible [`Tool`](https://docs.portialabs.ai/intro-to-tools) abstraction, or use 
        our growing plug and play authenticated 
        [tool library](https://docs.portialabs.ai/run-portia-tools), which will include a number of 
        popular SaaS providers over time (Google, Zendesk, Hubspot, Github etc.). All Portia tools 
        feature just-in-time authentication with token refresh, offering security without 
        compromising on user experience.
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Alright let's roll our sleeves up and get you spinning up them agents :robot:! Next up we'll install 
the SDK locally and validate your setup, before creating a Portia cloud account.

<details open style={{
  backgroundColor: "rgba(128, 0, 128, 0.1)",
  borderLeft: "5px solid purple",
  padding: "10px",
  borderRadius: "5px",
  margin: "10px 0"
}}>
  <summary style={{ color: "5D3FD3", fontWeight: "bold", cursor: "pointer" }}>
    🎉 I'm feeling lucky
  </summary>
  <p>If you prefer to just dive right into an example, why not head over to the intro example in our <a href="https://github.com/portiaAI/portia-agent-examples/blob/main/get_started_google_tools/README.md" target="_blank">**examples repo (↗)**</a>.</p>
</details>

## Setup and configuration

<div style={{ display: "flex", flexWrap: "nowrap", overflow: "visible", gap: "16px", width: "100%" }}>
    <div style={{ width: "33%" }}>
      <CardLayout
        href="/install"
        icon=""
        title="Install and setup"
        description="Get setup and run a query."
      />
    </div>
    <div style={{ width: "34%" }}>
      <CardLayout
        href="/setup-account"
        icon=""
        title="Set up a Portia account"
        description="Sign up for a Portia cloud account."
      />
    </div>
    <div style={{ width: "33%" }}>
      <CardLayout
        href="/manage-config"
        icon=""
        title="Manage your config"
        description="Learn how to configure your Portia." 
      />
    </div>
</div>
