docs/SDK/portia/execution_context.md, before:

---
sidebar_label: execution_context
title: portia.execution_context
---

Provides execution context to the planning and execution agents.

This module defines the `ExecutionContext` class and utilities for managing execution
contexts for planning and execution agents. It provides a way to pass runtime-specific information
for each run execution, ensuring flexibility and context isolation, especially in
multi-threaded or asynchronous applications.

Key Features:
- The `ExecutionContext` class encapsulates information such as user identification
  and additional data for planning and execution agents.
- The `execution_context` context manager allows for context isolation, ensuring
  that each task or thread has its own independent execution context.
- The `get_execution_context` function allows retrieval of the current execution context.

## ExecutionContext Objects

```python
class ExecutionContext(BaseModel)
```

Execution context provides runtime information to the portia client and planning and execution agents.

Unlike configuration settings, it is designed to be used on a per-request basis,
allowing customization at runtime. For example, this can pass end-user-specific
information to planning and execution agents for dynamic adjustments.

**Attributes**:

- `end_user_id` _Optional[str]_ - The identifier of the user for whom the run is running.
  Used for authentication and debugging purposes.
- `additional_data` _dict[str, str]_ - Arbitrary additional data useful for debugging.

#### empty\_context

```python
def empty_context() -> ExecutionContext
```

Return an empty execution context.

**Returns**:

- `ExecutionContext` - A default `ExecutionContext` instance with no specific data set.

#### execution\_context

```python
@contextmanager
def execution_context(
    context: ExecutionContext | None = None,
    end_user_id: str | None = None,
    additional_data: dict[str, str] | None = None
) -> Generator[None, None, None]
```

Set the execution context for the duration of the PlanRun.

This context manager ensures context isolation by using `contextvars.ContextVar`,
meaning that the execution context set within this block will only affect
the current task or thread. This is particularly useful in both multi-threaded
and asynchronous applications, such as web servers or task queues, where multiple
tasks or threads may need independent contexts simultaneously.

**Arguments**:

- `context` _Optional[ExecutionContext]_ - The execution context to set for the current task.
  If not provided, a new `ExecutionContext` is created using the provided parameters.
- `end_user_id` _Optional[str]_ - An identifier for the end user, used to customize
  the execution for specific users. Defaults to `None`.
- `additional_data` _Optional[Dict[str, str]]_ - Arbitrary additional data to associate
  with the context. Defaults to an empty dictionary.
  

**Yields**:

- `None` - The block of code within the context manager executes with the specified context.
  
  Context Isolation:
  - The `_execution_context` object is a `ContextVar`, ensuring that the `ExecutionContext`
  set in one task or thread does not affect others.
  - When the context manager exits, the context for the current task is cleaned up
  to avoid memory leaks or unintended persistence of data.
  

**Example**:

`context`0

#### get\_execution\_context

```python
def get_execution_context() -> ExecutionContext
```

Retrieve the current execution context.

This function retrieves the `ExecutionContext` that is currently set. If no context
is set, an empty `ExecutionContext` is returned.

**Returns**:

- `ExecutionContext` - The current execution context, or an empty context if none is set.

#### is\_execution\_context\_set

```python
def is_execution_context_set() -> bool
```

Check whether an execution context is currently set.

**Returns**:

- `bool` - `True` if an execution context is set, otherwise `False`.

Commit message:

Release to Production (#96)
* Update docs from SDK [skip ci]

* Update docs from SDK [skip ci]

* [POR-1070] browser docs (#87)

* Update docs from SDK [skip ci]

* basic ull docs (#92)

* basic ull

* remove python example

* update for comments

* Update docs from SDK [skip ci]

* pip install docs fix + subscription upgrade tip (#89)

* Add quotes around pip install groups

* Add tip for managing your account

* Update browser tool docs to reflect local vs remote infra (#94)

* Update docs from SDK [skip ci]

* Update docs from SDK [skip ci]

* Update tools docs with script re-run from platform/backend (#93)

* Update docs with script re-run from platform/backend

* Update README

* Add browser docs

* Remove BrowserForUrl tool

* Improve browser docs

* Update docs from SDK [skip ci]

* Update end user docs (#88)

* Update end user docs

* Update docs_on_pr.yml

* allow alpha

* lint

* bm

* bm

* bm

* pr

* Update docs from SDK [skip ci]

* Refresh tools documentation (#95)

---------

Co-authored-by: github-actions[bot] <github-actions[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: emmaportia <emma@portialabs.ai>
Co-authored-by: Nathan Perkins <nathanjp91@gmail.com>
Co-authored-by: TomSPortia <tom@portialabs.ai>

docs/SDK/portia/execution_context.md, after:

---
sidebar_label: execution_context
title: portia.execution_context
---

Provides execution context to the planning and execution agents.

This module defines the `ExecutionContext` class and utilities for managing execution
contexts for planning and execution agents. It provides a way to pass runtime-specific information
for each run execution, ensuring flexibility and context isolation, especially in
multi-threaded or asynchronous applications.

Key Features:
- The `ExecutionContext` class encapsulates information such as user identification
  and additional data for planning and execution agents.
- The `execution_context` context manager allows for context isolation, ensuring
  that each task or thread has its own independent execution context.
- The `get_execution_context` function allows retrieval of the current execution context.

## ExecutionContext Objects

```python
class ExecutionContext(BaseModel)
```

Execution context provides runtime information to the portia client and planning and execution agents.

Unlike configuration settings, it is designed to be used on a per-request basis,
allowing customization at runtime. For example, this can pass end-user-specific
information to planning and execution agents for dynamic adjustments.

**Attributes**:

- `additional_data` _dict[str, str]_ - Arbitrary additional data useful for debugging.

#### empty\_context

```python
def empty_context() -> ExecutionContext
```

Return an empty execution context.

**Returns**:

- `ExecutionContext` - A default `ExecutionContext` instance with no specific data set.

#### execution\_context

```python
@contextmanager
def execution_context(
    context: ExecutionContext | None = None,
    additional_data: dict[str, str] | None = None
) -> Generator[None, None, None]
```

Set the execution context for the duration of the PlanRun.

This context manager ensures context isolation by using `contextvars.ContextVar`,
meaning that the execution context set within this block will only affect
the current task or thread. This is particularly useful in both multi-threaded
and asynchronous applications, such as web servers or task queues, where multiple
tasks or threads may need independent contexts simultaneously.

**Arguments**:

- `context` _Optional[ExecutionContext]_ - The execution context to set for the current task.
  If not provided, a new `ExecutionContext` is created using the provided parameters.
- `additional_data` _Optional[Dict[str, str]]_ - Arbitrary additional data to associate
  with the context. Defaults to an empty dictionary.
  

**Yields**:

- `None` - The block of code within the context manager executes with the specified context.
  
  Context Isolation:
  - The `_execution_context` object is a `ContextVar`, ensuring that the `ExecutionContext`
  set in one task or thread does not affect others.
  - When the context manager exits, the context for the current task is cleaned up
  to avoid memory leaks or unintended persistence of data.
  

**Example**:

```python
    with execution_context(additional_data={"key": "value"}):
        # Code here runs with the specified execution context
    # Outside the block, the execution context is cleared for the current task.
```

#### get\_execution\_context

```python
def get_execution_context() -> ExecutionContext
```

Retrieve the current execution context.

This function retrieves the `ExecutionContext` that is currently set. If no context
is set, an empty `ExecutionContext` is returned.

**Returns**:

- `ExecutionContext` - The current execution context, or an empty context if none is set.

#### is\_execution\_context\_set

```python
def is_execution_context_set() -> bool
```

Check whether an execution context is currently set.

**Returns**:

- `bool` - `True` if an execution context is set, otherwise `False`.
