docs/product/Plan and run workflows/Execute a workflow.md, before:

---
sidebar_position: 2
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Execute a workflow
Learn how to run a workflow from an existing plan or end-to-end.

## Overview of workflows in Portia
A workflow is a unique instantiation of a plan. The purpose of a workflow is to capture the state of a unique plan run at every step in an auditable way. This includes:
- A step index tracking at which step we are in the execution of the workflow
- The actual workflow state e.g. NOT_STARTED, IN_PROGRESS, COMPLETE or NEED_CLARIFICATION
- A list of step outputs that is populated throughout the workflow execution.

In a later section we will also see that the worflow state also tracks a list of instances where human input was solicited during workflow execution, known as `clarifications`.

Workflow states are captured in the `Workflow` class (<a href="/SDK/portia/workflow" target="_blank">**SDK reference ↗**</a>). Let's examine the final workflow state for a plan we generate from a similar query to the previous section, namely `add the temperature in London to the temperature in Beirut right now`:
<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="plan" label="Generated plan >>">
    ```json title="plan-b5e013e8-6aae-461d-ac01-3a303f56935c.json"
    {
        "id": "b5e013e8-6aae-461d-ac01-3a303f56935c",
        "query": "add the temperature in London to the temperature in Beirut right now",
        "steps": [
            {
                "task": "Get the current temperature in London.",
                "tool_name": "Weather Tool",
                "output": "$london_temperature"
            },
            {
                "task": "Get the current temperature in Beirut.",
                "tool_name": "Weather Tool",
                "output": "$beirut_temperature"
            },
            {
                "task": "Add the temperatures from London and Beirut.",
                "input": [
                    {
                        "name": "$london_temperature",
                        "description": "The current temperature in London."
                    },
                    {
                        "name": "$beirut_temperature",
                        "description": "The current temperature in Beirut."
                    }
                ],
                "tool_name": "Add Tool",
                "output": "$total_temperature"
            }
        ]
    }
    ```
  </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="workflow" label="Workflow in final state" default>
    ```json title="workflow-9b594ac2-fe12-4e91-8283-602821cf8e63.json"
    {
        "id": "9b594ac2-fe12-4e91-8283-602821cf8e63",
        "plan_id": "b5e013e8-6aae-461d-ac01-3a303f56935c",
        "current_step_index": 2,
        "clarifications": [],
        "state": "COMPLETE",
        "step_outputs": 
        {
            "$london_temperature": {
                "value": "The current weather in London is clear sky with a temperature of 2.33°C."
            },
            "$beirut_temperature": {
                "value": "The current weather in Beirut is clear sky with a temperature of 14.41°C."
            },
            "$total_temperature": {
                "value": 16.740000000000002
            }
        },
        "final_output": {
            "value": 16.740000000000002
        }
    }









    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

Note that every workflow has a unique `id` and relates to a unique `plan_id`. If you were to attempt running a workflow from the same plan multiple times, you would generate multiple `Workflow` objects each with a unique `id` but all with the same `plan_id` property.

## Workflow state changes
If you'd like to inspect the individual state changes for the above workflow, feel free to cycle through them in the video below.
<iframe width="931" height="550" title="" src="https://snappify.com/embed/c8eb2bee-f784-4d24-b573-39bfca493eda?responsive=1&p=1&autoplay=1&b=0" allow="clipboard-write" allowfullscreen="" loading="lazy" frameborder="0"></iframe>

## Executing a workflow from plan or end-to-end
Let's expand on the plan generation code we wrote the previous section and execute a workflow from that plan. This gives you the opportunity to serve the plan to the user and get their feedback / iterate on the plan before running it for example. Here is the code to do that:
```python title="main.py"
from portia.runner import Runner
from portia.config import default_config
from portia.tool_registry import InMemoryToolRegistry
from demo_tools.addition_tool import AdditionTool
from demo_tools.weather_tool import WeatherTool

# Load required tools into a tool registry.
demo_tool_registry = InMemoryToolRegistry.from_local_tools([AdditionTool(), WeatherTool()])
# Instantiate a Portia runner. Load it with the default config and with the simple tool above.
runner = Runner(config=default_config(), tool_registry=demo_tool_registry)

# Generate the plan from the user query
plan = runner.plan_query('add the temperature in London to the temperature in Beirut right now')

# INSERT CODE WHERE YOU SERVE THE PLAN TO THE USER OR ITERATE ON IT IN ANY WAY

# Execute workflow from the generated plan
# highlight-next-line
output = runner.run_plan(plan)
# Serialise into JSON an print the output
print(output.model_dump_json())
```

Here we are storing the `Plan` object returned by the `plan_query` method and then using the `run_plan` method to instantiate a workflow from it. If you wanted to run a workflow immediately from the user query, without examining the `Plan` object in between you could simply use the 'run_query' method from your `Runner` class like so:
```python title="main.py"
from portia.runner import Runner
from portia.config import default_config
from portia.tool_registry import InMemoryToolRegistry
from demo_tools.addition_tool import AdditionTool
from demo_tools.weather_tool import WeatherTool

# Load required tools into a tool registry.
demo_tool_registry = InMemoryToolRegistry.from_local_tools([AdditionTool(), WeatherTool()])
# Instantiate a Portia runner. Load it with the default config and with the simple tool above.
runner = Runner(config=default_config(), tool_registry=demo_tool_registry)

# Execute a workflow directly from the user query
# highlight-next-line
output = runner.run_query('add the temperature in London to the temperature in Beirut right now')
# Serialise into JSON an print the output
print(output.model_dump_json())
```

Commit message:

extend your tool definitions section

docs/product/Plan and run workflows/Execute a workflow.md, after:

---
sidebar_position: 2
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Execute a workflow
Learn how to run a workflow from an existing plan or end-to-end.
:::tip[TL;DR]
- A workflow is a unique run of a plan. It is represented by the `workflow` class (<a href="/SDK/portia/workflow" target="_blank">**SDK reference ↗**</a>).
- An agent is spun up to execute every step in the workflow. The `workflow` object tracks the state of the workflow execution and is enriched at every step by the relevant agent.
- A workflow can be generated either from a plan using the `run_plan` method or directly from a user prompt using the `run_query` method of the `runner` class (<a href="/SDK/portia/runner" target="_blank">**SDK reference ↗**</a>).
:::

## Overview of workflows in Portia
A workflow is a unique instantiation of a plan. The purpose of a workflow is to capture the state of a unique plan run at every step in an auditable way. This includes:
- A step index tracking at which step we are in the execution of the workflow
- The actual workflow state e.g. NOT_STARTED, IN_PROGRESS, COMPLETE or NEED_CLARIFICATION
- A list of step outputs that is populated throughout the workflow execution.

In a later section we will also see that the worflow state also tracks a list of instances where human input was solicited during workflow execution, known as `clarification`.

Workflow states are captured in the `workflow` class (<a href="/SDK/portia/workflow" target="_blank">**SDK reference ↗**</a>). In the previous section (<a href="/product/Plan%20and%20run%20workflows/Generate%20a%20plan" target="_blank">**Generate a plan ↗**</a>), we generated a plan in response to the query `add the temperature in London to the temperature in Beirut right now`. Let's examine the final state once we run a workflow for that plan:
<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="plan" label="Generated plan >>">
    ```json title="plan-b5e013e8-6aae-461d-ac01-3a303f56935c.json"
    {
        "id": "b5e013e8-6aae-461d-ac01-3a303f56935c",
        "query": "add the temperature in London to the temperature in Beirut right now",
        "steps": [
            {
                "task": "Get the current temperature in London.",
                "tool_name": "Weather Tool",
                "output": "$london_temperature"
            },
            {
                "task": "Get the current temperature in Beirut.",
                "tool_name": "Weather Tool",
                "output": "$beirut_temperature"
            },
            {
                "task": "Add the temperatures from London and Beirut.",
                "input": [
                    {
                        "name": "$london_temperature",
                        "description": "The current temperature in London."
                    },
                    {
                        "name": "$beirut_temperature",
                        "description": "The current temperature in Beirut."
                    }
                ],
                "tool_name": "Add Tool",
                "output": "$total_temperature"
            }
        ]
    }
    ```
  </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="workflow" label="Workflow in final state" default>
    ```json title="workflow-9b594ac2-fe12-4e91-8283-602821cf8e63.json"
    {
        "id": "9b594ac2-fe12-4e91-8283-602821cf8e63",
        "plan_id": "b5e013e8-6aae-461d-ac01-3a303f56935c",
        "current_step_index": 2,
        "clarifications": [],
        "state": "COMPLETE",
        "step_outputs": 
        {
            "$london_temperature": {
                "value": "The current weather in London is clear sky with a temperature of 2.33°C."
            },
            "$beirut_temperature": {
                "value": "The current weather in Beirut is clear sky with a temperature of 14.41°C."
            },
            "$total_temperature": {
                "value": 16.740000000000002
            }
        },
        "final_output": {
            "value": 16.740000000000002
        }
    }









    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

Note that every workflow has a unique `id` and relates to a unique `plan_id`. If you were to attempt running a workflow from the same plan multiple times, you would generate multiple `Workflow` objects each with a unique `id` but all with the same `plan_id` property.

## Workflow state changes [NEED LOGGING FROM tom@ HERE]
If you'd like to inspect the individual state changes for the above workflow, feel free to cycle through them in the video below. Note how the workflow state is enriched with step outputs at every step of the execution.
<iframe width="931" height="550" title="" src="https://snappify.com/embed/c8eb2bee-f784-4d24-b573-39bfca493eda?responsive=1&p=1&autoplay=1&b=0" allow="clipboard-write" allowfullscreen="" loading="lazy" frameborder="0"></iframe>

## Execute a workflow from a plan
Let's expand on the plan generation code we wrote the previous section and execute a workflow from that plan. This gives you the opportunity to serve the plan to the user and get their feedback / iterate on the plan before running it for example. Here is the code to do that:
```python title="main.py"
from portia.runner import Runner
from portia.config import default_config
from portia.tool_registry import InMemoryToolRegistry
from demo_tools.addition_tool import AdditionTool
from demo_tools.weather_tool import WeatherTool

# Load required tools into a tool registry.
demo_tool_registry = InMemoryToolRegistry.from_local_tools([AdditionTool(), WeatherTool()])
# Instantiate a Portia runner. Load it with the default config and with the tools above.
runner = Runner(config=default_config(), tool_registry=demo_tool_registry)

# Generate the plan from the user query
plan = runner.plan_query('add the temperature in London to the temperature in Beirut right now')

# INSERT CODE WHERE YOU SERVE THE PLAN TO THE USER OR ITERATE ON IT IN ANY WAY

# Execute workflow from the generated plan
# highlight-next-line
output = runner.run_plan(plan)
# Serialise into JSON an print the output
print(output.model_dump_json())
```

Here we are storing the `plan` object returned by the `plan_query` method and then using the `run_plan` method to instantiate a workflow from it. 

## Execute a workflow directly from a user query
You can also run a workflow immediately from the user query, without examining the `plan` object in between. This would generate a plan as intermediate step as well but will also immediately spawn a workflow run from it. You would simply use the `run_query` method from your `runner` class like so:
```python title="main.py"
from portia.runner import Runner
from portia.config import default_config
from portia.tool_registry import InMemoryToolRegistry
from demo_tools.addition_tool import AdditionTool
from demo_tools.weather_tool import WeatherTool

# Load required tools into a tool registry.
demo_tool_registry = InMemoryToolRegistry.from_local_tools([AdditionTool(), WeatherTool()])
# Instantiate a Portia runner. Load it with the default config and with the tools above.
runner = Runner(config=default_config(), tool_registry=demo_tool_registry)

# Execute a workflow directly from the user query
# highlight-next-line
output = runner.run_query('add the temperature in London to the temperature in Beirut right now')
# Serialise into JSON an print the output
print(output.model_dump_json())
```
You should now be able to generate plan and spawn workflow runs from them. We have used a couple of demo tools so far. Head on over to the next section to look at how we can add custom tools to the mix!
