docs/product/Plan and run workflows/Run a plan.md, before:

---
sidebar_position: 2
slug: /run-plan
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Run a plan
Learn how to run a plan run from an existing plan or end-to-end.
:::tip[TL;DR]
- A plan run is (uncontroversially) a unique run of a plan. It is represented by the `PlanRun` class (<a href="/SDK/portia/plan_run" target="_blank">**SDK reference ↗**</a>).
- An agent is spun up to execute every step in the plan run. The `PlanRun` object tracks the state of the plan run and is enriched at every step by the relevant agent.
- A plan run can be generated from a plan using the `run_plan` method. 
- You can also plan a query response, then create and execute a plan run in one fell swoop using the `run` method of the `Portia` instance class (<a href="/SDK/portia/portia" target="_blank">**SDK reference ↗**</a>).
:::

## Overview of plan runs in Portia
Portia captures the state of a plan run at every step in an auditable way. This includes:
- A step index tracking at which step we are in the plan run.
- The actual plan run state e.g. NOT_STARTED, IN_PROGRESS, COMPLETE, READY_TO_RESUME or NEED_CLARIFICATION.
- A list of step outputs that is populated throughout the plan run.

In a later section we will also see that a plan run state also tracks the list of instances where human input was solicited during plan run, known as `Clarification`.

Plan run states are captured in the `PlanRun` class (<a href="/SDK/portia/plan_run" target="_blank">**SDK reference ↗**</a>). In the previous section (<a href="/generate-plan" target="_blank">**Generate a plan ↗**</a>), we generated a plan in response to the query `Which stock price grew faster in 2024, Amazon or Google?`. Let's examine the final state once we run that plan:
<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="plan" label="Generated plan">
    ```json title="plan-1dcd74a4-0af5-490a-a7d0-0df4fd983977.json"
    {
      "id": "plan-1dcd74a4-0af5-490a-a7d0-0df4fd983977",
      "plan_context": {
        "query": "Which stock price grew faster, Amazon or Google?",
        "tool_ids": [
          "calculator_tool",
          "weather_tool",
          "search_tool"
        ]
      },
      "steps": [
        {
          "task": "Search for the latest stock price growth data for Amazon.",
          "inputs": [],
          "tool_id": "search_tool",
          "output": "$amazon_stock_growth"
        },
        {
          "task": "Search for the latest stock price growth data for Google.",
          "inputs": [],
          "tool_id": "search_tool",
          "output": "$google_stock_growth"
        },
        {
          "task": "Compare the stock price growth of Amazon and Google.",
          "inputs": [
            {
              "name": "$amazon_stock_growth",
              "description": "The stock price growth data for Amazon."
            },
            {
              "name": "$google_stock_growth",
              "description": "The stock price growth data for Google."
            }
          ],
          "tool_id": "llm_tool",
          "output": "$stock_growth_comparison"
        }
      ]
  }
    ```
  </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="plan_run" label="Plan run in final state" default>
    ```json title="prun-18d9aa91-0066-413f-af32-b979bce89821.json"
    {
      "id": "prun-18d9aa91-0066-413f-af32-b979bce89821",
      "plan_id": "plan-a89efeb0-51ef-4f2c-b435-a936c27c3cfc",
      "current_step_index": 2,
      "state": "COMPLETE",
      "execution_context": {
        "additional_data": {},
      },
      "outputs": {
        "clarifications": [],
        "step_outputs": {
          "$amazon_stock_growth": {
            "value": "Amazon stock closed at an all-time high of $214.10 in November...",
            "summary": null
          },
          "$google_stock_growth": {
            "value": "In 2024, Google's parent company Alphabet surged 35.5% according to...",
            "summary": null
          },
          "$faster_growth": {
            "value": "In 2024, Amazon's stock price grew by 52%, while Google's parent company Alphabet saw a stock price surge of 35.5%.",
            "summary": null
          }
        },
        "final_output": {
          "value": "In 2024, Amazon's stock price grew by 52%, while Google's parent company Alphabet saw a stock price surge of 35.5%.",
          "summary": null
        }
      }
    }









    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

Every plan run has a unique `id` and relates to a unique `plan_id`. If you were to attempt running the same plan multiple times, you would generate multiple `PlanRun` objects each with a unique `id` but all with the same `plan_id` property.

## Plan run state changes
As Portia cycles through a plan run, an execution agent is instantiated at every step and that agent will call the tool designated for that. The plan run state is enriched with step outputs at every step of the execution as well. Note that in this example the main tool used is the 'Search Tool' provided in this SDK in the `example_tool_registry`, and wraps around the Tavily API. We will discuss tools in more depth in the next section.
You should be able to inspect the state changes for the above plan run in the logs when you run the code.
<div style={{
  overflow: 'hidden',
  marginLeft: 'auto',
  marginRight: 'auto',
  borderRadius: '10px',
  width: '100%',
  maxWidth: '931px',
  position: 'relative'
}}>
  <div style={{
    width: '100%',
    paddingBottom: '59.07626208378088%'
  }}></div>
  <iframe 
    width="931" 
    height="550" 
    title="Embedded content"
    src="https://snappify.com/embed/c8eb2bee-f784-4d24-b573-39bfca493eda?responsive=1&p=1&autoplay=1&b=0" 
    allow="clipboard-write" 
    allowFullScreen
    loading="lazy" 
    style={{
      background: '#eee',
      position: 'absolute',
      left: 0,
      top: 0,
      width: '100%'
    }} 
    frameBorder="0"
  ></iframe>
</div>
<small>Animation above made on the brilliant <a href="https://snappify.com" target="_blank">**snappify.com ↗**</a>.</small>




## Run from a pre-expressed plan
<details>
<summary>**Tavily API key required**</summary>

We will use a simple GET endpoint from Tavily in this section. Please sign up to obtain an API key from them (<a href="https://tavily.com/" target="_blank">**↗**</a>) and set it in the environment variable `TAVILY_API_KEY`.
</details>

To get to an output that looks like the plan run example above, let's expand on the code we used to generate a plan in the previous section (<a href="/generate-plan" target="_blank">**↗**</a>) by adding code to create and execute a plan run from that plan. This approach gives you the opportunity to serve that plan to the user and get their feedback / iterate on it before running the plan run for example. Here is the code to do that:
```python title="main.py"
from dotenv import load_dotenv
from portia import (
    Portia,
    default_config,
    example_tool_registry,
)

load_dotenv()

# Instantiate a Portia instance. Load it with the default config and with the example tools.
portia = Portia(tools=example_tool_registry)

# Generate the plan from the user query
plan = portia.plan('Which stock price grew faster in 2024, Amazon or Google?')

# [OPTIONAL] INSERT CODE WHERE YOU SERVE THE PLAN TO THE USER OR ITERATE ON IT IN ANY WAY

# Run the generated plan
plan_run = portia.run_plan(plan)

# Serialise into JSON and print the output
print(plan_run.model_dump_json(indent=2))
```

Here we are storing the `Plan` object returned by the `plan` method. We then use the `run_plan` method to start a `PlanRun`.

:::info
If you want to see an example where a user iterates on a plan before we proceed with plan run, take a look at the intro example in our <a href="https://github.com/portiaAI/portia-agent-examples/blob/main/get_started_google_tools/README.md" target="_blank">**examples repo (↗)**</a>.
:::

## Run a plan directly from a user query
<details>
<summary>**Tavily API key required**</summary>

We will use a simple GET endpoint from Tavily in this section. Please sign up to obtain an API key from them (<a href="https://tavily.com/" target="_blank">**↗**</a>) and set it in the environment variable `TAVILY_API_KEY`.
</details>

You can also run a plan immediately from the user query, without examining the `Plan` object in between. This would generate a plan as an intermediate step as well but will also immediately spawn a plan run from it. You would simply use the `run` method from your `Portia` instance class like so:
```python title="main.py"
from dotenv import load_dotenv
from portia import (
    Portia,
    default_config,
    example_tool_registry,
)

load_dotenv()

# Instantiate a Portia instance. Load it with the default config and with the example tools.
portia = Portia(tools=example_tool_registry)

# Generate the plan from the user query
plan_run = portia.run('Which stock price grew faster in 2024, Amazon or Google?')

# Serialise into JSON and print the output
print(plan_run.model_dump_json(indent=2))
```
:::note[Track plan run states in logs]
You can track plan run state changes live as they occur through the logs by setting `default_log_level` to DEBUG in the `Config` of your `Portia` instance (<a href="/manage-config#manage-logging" target="_blank">**Manage logging ↗**</a>).
:::

## Run a plan stored in Portia cloud

When you set the storage_class property to CLOUD in the config of your Portia instance (see <a href="/manage-config##manage-storage-options" target="_blank">**Manage storage options ↗**</a> for more details), plans will automatically be stored in the cloud once created. You can then easily retrieve plans from storage in order to run them:

```python
from dotenv import load_dotenv
from portia import (
    Portia,
    default_config,
    Config,
    StorageClass,
    PlanUUID
)

# Load the Portia API key
load_dotenv()

# Set up the Portia instance to use cloud storage
config = Config.from_default(storage_class=StorageClass.CLOUD)
portia = Portia(config=config)

# This will create a plan that is stored in Portia Cloud
plan = portia.plan('Which stock price grew faster in 2024, Amazon or Google?')

# We can then either run the plan directly from the object...
run = portia.run_plan(plan=plan)

# Or we can use the ID so that the plan is loaded from storage
run = portia.run_plan(plan=PlanUUID.from_string("plan-f8003b53-9b62-44e2-ac67-887146c07949"))
```

This can be very useful if you want to run a plan from a different process to the one that created the plan.

Commit message:

Add plan input docs (#99)
* Add plan input docs

* Update SDK version

* CR

* Update

docs/product/Plan and run workflows/Run a plan.md, after:

---
sidebar_position: 2
slug: /run-plan
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Run a plan
Learn how to run a plan run from an existing plan or end-to-end.
:::tip[TL;DR]
- A plan run is (uncontroversially) a unique run of a plan. It is represented by the `PlanRun` class (<a href="/SDK/portia/plan_run" target="_blank">**SDK reference ↗**</a>).
- An agent is spun up to execute every step in the plan run. The `PlanRun` object tracks the state of the plan run and is enriched at every step by the relevant agent.
- A plan run can be generated from a plan using the `run_plan` method. 
- You can also plan a query response, then create and execute a plan run in one fell swoop using the `run` method of the `Portia` instance class (<a href="/SDK/portia/portia" target="_blank">**SDK reference ↗**</a>).
:::

## Overview of plan runs in Portia
Portia captures the state of a plan run at every step in an auditable way. This includes:
- A step index tracking at which step we are in the plan run.
- The actual plan run state e.g. NOT_STARTED, IN_PROGRESS, COMPLETE, READY_TO_RESUME or NEED_CLARIFICATION.
- A list of step outputs that is populated throughout the plan run.

In a later section we will also see that a plan run state also tracks the list of instances where human input was solicited during plan run, known as `Clarification`.

Plan run states are captured in the `PlanRun` class (<a href="/SDK/portia/plan_run" target="_blank">**SDK reference ↗**</a>). In the previous section (<a href="/generate-plan" target="_blank">**Generate a plan ↗**</a>), we generated a plan in response to the query `Which stock price grew faster in 2024, Amazon or Google?`. Let's examine the final state once we run that plan:
<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="plan" label="Generated plan">
    ```json title="plan-1dcd74a4-0af5-490a-a7d0-0df4fd983977.json"
    {
      "id": "plan-1dcd74a4-0af5-490a-a7d0-0df4fd983977",
      "plan_context": {
        "query": "Which stock price grew faster, Amazon or Google?",
        "tool_ids": [
          "calculator_tool",
          "weather_tool",
          "search_tool"
        ]
      },
      "steps": [
        {
          "task": "Search for the latest stock price growth data for Amazon.",
          "inputs": [],
          "tool_id": "search_tool",
          "output": "$amazon_stock_growth"
        },
        {
          "task": "Search for the latest stock price growth data for Google.",
          "inputs": [],
          "tool_id": "search_tool",
          "output": "$google_stock_growth"
        },
        {
          "task": "Compare the stock price growth of Amazon and Google.",
          "inputs": [
            {
              "name": "$amazon_stock_growth",
              "description": "The stock price growth data for Amazon."
            },
            {
              "name": "$google_stock_growth",
              "description": "The stock price growth data for Google."
            }
          ],
          "tool_id": "llm_tool",
          "output": "$stock_growth_comparison"
        }
      ]
  }
    ```
  </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="plan_run" label="Plan run in final state" default>
    ```json title="prun-18d9aa91-0066-413f-af32-b979bce89821.json"
    {
      "id": "prun-18d9aa91-0066-413f-af32-b979bce89821",
      "plan_id": "plan-a89efeb0-51ef-4f2c-b435-a936c27c3cfc",
      "current_step_index": 2,
      "state": "COMPLETE",
      "execution_context": {
        "additional_data": {},
      },
      "outputs": {
        "clarifications": [],
        "step_outputs": {
          "$amazon_stock_growth": {
            "value": "Amazon stock closed at an all-time high of $214.10 in November...",
            "summary": null
          },
          "$google_stock_growth": {
            "value": "In 2024, Google's parent company Alphabet surged 35.5% according to...",
            "summary": null
          },
          "$faster_growth": {
            "value": "In 2024, Amazon's stock price grew by 52%, while Google's parent company Alphabet saw a stock price surge of 35.5%.",
            "summary": null
          }
        },
        "final_output": {
          "value": "In 2024, Amazon's stock price grew by 52%, while Google's parent company Alphabet saw a stock price surge of 35.5%.",
          "summary": null
        }
      }
    }









    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

Every plan run has a unique `id` and relates to a unique `plan_id`. If you were to attempt running the same plan multiple times, you would generate multiple `PlanRun` objects each with a unique `id` but all with the same `plan_id` property.

## Plan run state changes
As Portia cycles through a plan run, an execution agent is instantiated at every step and that agent will call the tool designated for that. The plan run state is enriched with step outputs at every step of the execution as well. Note that in this example the main tool used is the 'Search Tool' provided in this SDK in the `example_tool_registry`, and wraps around the Tavily API. We will discuss tools in more depth in the next section.
You should be able to inspect the state changes for the above plan run in the logs when you run the code.
<div style={{
  overflow: 'hidden',
  marginLeft: 'auto',
  marginRight: 'auto',
  borderRadius: '10px',
  width: '100%',
  maxWidth: '931px',
  position: 'relative'
}}>
  <div style={{
    width: '100%',
    paddingBottom: '59.07626208378088%'
  }}></div>
  <iframe 
    width="931" 
    height="550" 
    title="Embedded content"
    src="https://snappify.com/embed/c8eb2bee-f784-4d24-b573-39bfca493eda?responsive=1&p=1&autoplay=1&b=0" 
    allow="clipboard-write" 
    allowFullScreen
    loading="lazy" 
    style={{
      background: '#eee',
      position: 'absolute',
      left: 0,
      top: 0,
      width: '100%'
    }} 
    frameBorder="0"
  ></iframe>
</div>
<small>Animation above made on the brilliant <a href="https://snappify.com" target="_blank">**snappify.com ↗**</a>.</small>


## Run from a pre-expressed plan
<details>
<summary>**Tavily API key required**</summary>

We will use a simple GET endpoint from Tavily in this section. Please sign up to obtain an API key from them (<a href="https://tavily.com/" target="_blank">**↗**</a>) and set it in the environment variable `TAVILY_API_KEY`.
</details>

To get to an output that looks like the plan run example above, let's expand on the code we used to generate a plan in the previous section (<a href="/generate-plan" target="_blank">**↗**</a>) by adding code to create and execute a plan run from that plan. This approach gives you the opportunity to serve that plan to the user and get their feedback / iterate on it before running the plan run for example. Here is the code to do that:
```python title="main.py"
from dotenv import load_dotenv
from portia import (
    Portia,
    example_tool_registry,
)

load_dotenv()

# Instantiate a Portia instance. Load it with the default config and with the example tools.
portia = Portia(tools=example_tool_registry)

# Generate the plan from the user query
plan = portia.plan('Which stock price grew faster in 2024, Amazon or Google?')

# [OPTIONAL] INSERT CODE WHERE YOU SERVE THE PLAN TO THE USER OR ITERATE ON IT IN ANY WAY

# Run the generated plan
plan_run = portia.run_plan(plan)

# Serialise into JSON and print the output
print(plan_run.model_dump_json(indent=2))
```

Here we are storing the `Plan` object returned by the `plan` method. We then use the `run_plan` method to start a `PlanRun`.

:::info
If you want to see an example where a user iterates on a plan before we proceed with plan run, take a look at the intro example in our <a href="https://github.com/portiaAI/portia-agent-examples/blob/main/get_started_google_tools/README.md" target="_blank">**examples repo (↗)**</a>.
:::

## Run directly from a user query
<details>
<summary>**Tavily API key required**</summary>

We will use a simple GET endpoint from Tavily in this section. Please sign up to obtain an API key from them (<a href="https://tavily.com/" target="_blank">**↗**</a>) and set it in the environment variable `TAVILY_API_KEY`.
</details>

You can also run a plan immediately from the user query, without examining the `Plan` object in between. This would generate a plan as an intermediate step as well but will also immediately spawn a plan run from it. You would simply use the `run` method from your `Portia` instance class like so:
```python title="main.py"
from dotenv import load_dotenv
from portia import (
    Portia,
    example_tool_registry,
)

load_dotenv()

# Instantiate a Portia instance. Load it with the default config and with the example tools.
portia = Portia(tools=example_tool_registry)

# Generate the plan from the user query
plan_run = portia.run('Which stock price grew faster in 2024, Amazon or Google?')

# Serialise into JSON and print the output
print(plan_run.model_dump_json(indent=2))
```
:::note[Track plan run states in logs]
You can track plan run state changes live as they occur through the logs by setting `default_log_level` to DEBUG in the `Config` of your `Portia` instance (<a href="/manage-config#manage-logging" target="_blank">**Manage logging ↗**</a>).
:::

## Run a plan stored in Portia cloud

When you set the storage_class property to CLOUD in the config of your Portia instance (see <a href="/manage-config##manage-storage-options" target="_blank">**Manage storage options ↗**</a> for more details), plans will automatically be stored in the cloud once created. You can then easily retrieve plans from storage in order to run them:

```python
from dotenv import load_dotenv
from portia import (
    Portia,
    default_config,
    Config,
    StorageClass,
    PlanUUID
)

# Load the Portia API key
load_dotenv()

# Set up the Portia instance to use cloud storage
config = Config.from_default(storage_class=StorageClass.CLOUD)
portia = Portia(config=config)

# This will create a plan that is stored in Portia Cloud
plan = portia.plan('Which stock price grew faster in 2024, Amazon or Google?')

# We can then either run the plan directly from the object...
run = portia.run_plan(plan=plan)

# Or we can use the ID so that the plan is loaded from storage
run = portia.run_plan(plan=PlanUUID.from_string("plan-f8003b53-9b62-44e2-ac67-887146c07949"))
```

This can be very useful if you want to run a plan from a different process to the one that created the plan.


## Run using plan inputs

So far the starting point for all plan runs is a user query for a specific set of inputs e.g. "get the weather in Beirut". This is in contrast to a generalised query e.g. "get the weather for a given city" where the city is provided dynamically per plan run. The PlanInput abstraction allows you to use a generalised query or plan "template" where the input differs with every plan run.

In the planning stage, you would define the list of plan inputs, providing a name and optional description for each, and pass those along with a generalised query as arguments to the portia.plan method. The planning agent is capable of generating a plan with "placeholders" for each plan input. To run that generalised plan, Portia then expects you to provide specific values for the inputs at each run.

For example, consider a simple agent that tells you the weather in a particular city, with the city provided as a plan input.
To set this up, we define the plan input for the planner as follows:
```python
from portia import Portia

portia = Portia()

# Specify the inputs you will use in the plan
plan_input = {"name":"$city", "description"="The city to get the temperature for"}
plan = portia.plan("Get the temperature for the provided city", plan_inputs=[plan_input])
```

This will create a single step plan that uses the weather tool with $city as an input to that tool.
Then, when running the plan, we pass in a value for the input. In this case, we select "London".
This value will then be used for the `$city` input in the plan and we will find the temperature in London.

```python skip=true
# Specify the values for those inputs when you run the plan
plan_run_inputs = {"name": "$city", "value": "London"}
plan_run = portia.run("Get the temperature for the provided city", plan_run_inputs=plan_run_inputs)
```
