---
sidebar_position: 3
slug: /gsuite-tools
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Google gSuite tools

## How Oauth works
All Portia tools using API endpoints that require Oauth are built with plug and play authentication support. They use Portia client credentials including client ID, client name and redirect URL. Such tools will raise a `Action Clarification` with an Oauth link as the action URL. The `runner.wait_for_ready()` method must be used in this scenario: Portia's Oauth server will listen for the authentication result and resolve the concerned clarification, allowing your workflow to resume again.

For more on this, please visit to the section on running Portia tools (<a href="/run-portia-tools" target="_blank">**↗**</a>). 

## Portia Google Calendar Check Availability Tool
**Tool ID:** portia::google_calendar_check_availability_tool<br/>**Tool description:** Checks the availability of this authenticated user for a given time range. DO NOT use this to validate availability of people the user wants to meet with. DO NOT use this unless the user specifically asks for availability checking, e.g by saying 'find when I am free', or 'check my availability'. Either the day or start_time must be provided. You should provide the end_time if one is specifically mentioned.<br/>**Usage notes:**<br/><br/>**Output schema:** <pre><code>[<br/>  Portia_Google_Calendar_Check_Availability_Tool(email: 'string') -> list[dict[str, str]],<br/>  Returns a list of times when the user is busy.<br/>]</code></pre>**Args schema:** <pre><code>\{<br/>  "name": "email",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "Email address to check availability for"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "start_time",<br/>  "type": "unknown",<br/>  "description": "Start time to check availability in ISO format, e.g 2024-09-20T20:00:00Z"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "end_time",<br/>  "type": "unknown",<br/>  "description": "End time to check availability in ISO format, can be omitted e.g 2024-09-20T20:00:00Z"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "day",<br/>  "type": "unknown",<br/>  "description": "The day to check availability for in ISO format, e.g 2024-09-20."<br/>\}</code></pre>
## Portia Google Calendar Create Event Tool
**Tool ID:** portia::google_calendar_create_event_tool<br/>**Tool description:** Creates a Google Calendar event. DO NOT call portia::google_calendar_check_availability_tool before using this tool, unless the user explicitly asks you to check their availability.<br/>**Usage notes:**<br/><br/>**Output schema:** <pre><code>[<br/>  Portia_Google_Calendar_Create_Event_Tool(event_title: 'string', start_time: 'string', end_time: 'string', event_description: 'string', attendees: 'array') -> dict,<br/>  dict: Output of the tool<br/>]</code></pre>**Args schema:** <pre><code>\{<br/>  "name": "event_title",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The title of the calendar event"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "start_time",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The start time of the event in ISO format, e.g 2024-09-20T20:00:00Z"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "end_time",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The end time of the event in ISO format, e.g 2024-09-20T20:00:00Z"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "event_description",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The description of the event"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "attendees",<br/>  "type": "array",<br/>  "description": "List of attendees' email addresses"<br/>\}</code></pre>
## Portia Google Calendar Delete Event Tool
**Tool ID:** portia::google_calendar_delete_event_tool<br/>**Tool description:** Deletes the Google Calendar event associated with the ID.<br/>**Usage notes:**<br/><br/>**Output schema:** <pre><code>[<br/>  Portia_Google_Calendar_Delete_Event_Tool(event_id: 'string') -> dict,<br/>  dict: Output of the tool<br/>]</code></pre>**Args schema:** <pre><code>\{<br/>  "name": "event_id",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The ID of the event to delete"<br/>\}</code></pre>
## Portia Google Calendar Get Events Details Tool
**Tool ID:** portia::google_calendar_get_event_details_tool<br/>**Tool description:** Gets Google Calendar event using an event ID.<br/>**Usage notes:**<br/><br/>**Output schema:** <pre><code>[<br/>  Portia_Google_Calendar_Get_Events_Details_Tool(event_id: 'string') -> dict,<br/>  A dictionary containing information about a single calendar event<br/>]</code></pre>**Args schema:** <pre><code>\{<br/>  "name": "event_id",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The event details to retrieve"<br/>\}</code></pre>
## Portia Google Calendar Get Events By Properties Tool
**Tool ID:** portia::google_calendar_get_events_by_properties_tool<br/>**Tool description:** Gets Google Calendar events by properties, returning the matching event details. You do not need to provide all the properties, only the ones you have provided with.<br/>**Usage notes:**<br/><br/>**Output schema:** <pre><code>[<br/>  Portia_Google_Calendar_Get_Events_By_Properties_Tool(event_title: 'string', event_description: 'string', attendees: 'array', max_results: 'integer') -> list[dict],<br/>  A list of dictionaries containing information about matching calendar events<br/>]</code></pre>**Args schema:** <pre><code>\{<br/>  "name": "event_title",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The title of the event to get"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "start_time",<br/>  "type": "unknown",<br/>  "description": "The earliest time of the events to get in ISO format, e.g 2024-09-20T20:00:00Z"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "end_time",<br/>  "type": "unknown",<br/>  "description": "The latest time of the events to get in ISO format, e.g 2024-09-20T20:00:00Z"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "event_description",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The description of the events to get"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "attendees",<br/>  "type": "array",<br/>  "description": "The attendees' of the events to get"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "max_results",<br/>  "type": "integer",<br/>  "description": "The maximum number of events to return"<br/>\}</code></pre>
## Portia Google Calendar Modify Event Tool
**Tool ID:** portia::google_calendar_modify_event_tool<br/>**Tool description:** Modifies an existing Google Calendar event. You must provide the event ID to modify, and can optionally provide new values if desired for the title, start time, end time, description, and attendees.<br/>**Usage notes:**<br/><br/>**Output schema:** <pre><code>[<br/>  Portia_Google_Calendar_Modify_Event_Tool(event_id: 'string') -> dict,<br/>  dict: Output of the tool<br/>]</code></pre>**Args schema:** <pre><code>\{<br/>  "name": "event_id",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The ID of the event to modify, likely retrieved from portia::google_calendar_get_events_by_properties_tool"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "event_title",<br/>  "type": "unknown",<br/>  "description": "The new title of the calendar event"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "start_time",<br/>  "type": "unknown",<br/>  "description": "The new start time in ISO format, e.g 2024-09-20T20:00:00Z"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "end_time",<br/>  "type": "unknown",<br/>  "description": "The new end time in ISO format, e.g 2024-09-20T20:00:00Z"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "event_description",<br/>  "type": "unknown",<br/>  "description": "The new description of the event"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "attendees",<br/>  "type": "unknown",<br/>  "description": "New list of attendees email addresses"<br/>\}</code></pre>
## Portia Google Docs Get Document Tool
**Tool ID:** portia::google_docs_get_document_tool<br/>**Tool description:** Get a document from Google Docs.<br/>**Usage notes:**<br/><br/>**Output schema:** <pre><code>[<br/>  Portia_Google_Docs_Get_Document_Tool(document_id: 'string') -> dict,<br/>  dict: Containing information about the document. Includes title, a structured body and other metadata like file type<br/>]</code></pre>**Args schema:** <pre><code>\{<br/>  "name": "document_id",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The ID of the document to get. It can contain letters, numbers, and some special characters."<br/>\}</code></pre>
## Portia Google Drive Search Tool
**Tool ID:** portia::google_drive_search_tool<br/>**Tool description:** Search for files in Google Drive.<br/>**Usage notes:**<br/><br/>**Output schema:** <pre><code>[<br/>  Portia_Google_Drive_Search_Tool(query: 'string') -> dict,<br/>  dict: Dictionary containing the results of the Google Drive search. Each file result includes metadata like name, id, mimeType and more.<br/>]</code></pre>**Args schema:** <pre><code>\{<br/>  "name": "query",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The query to search for."<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "mime_type",<br/>  "type": "unknown",<br/>  "description": "The MIME type of the files to search for. Use this if you want to search for files with a specific type of file or file extension. For example, 'application/pdf' or 'pdf'. Uses RFC 6838 standard for MIME types."<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "shared_with_me_by",<br/>  "type": "unknown",<br/>  "description": "The email address of the user who shared the files with me."<br/>\}</code></pre>
## Portia Draft Email Tool
**Tool ID:** portia::draft_email_tool<br/>**Tool description:** Drafts an email for the recipients indicated. Should not be used with the send email tool.Instead to send a draft email use the send_draft_email_tool.<br/>**Usage notes:**<br/><br/>**Output schema:** <pre><code>[<br/>  Portia_Draft_Email_Tool(recipients: 'array', email_title: 'string', email_body: 'string') -> dict,<br/>  dict: Output of the email drafted<br/>]</code></pre>**Args schema:** <pre><code>\{<br/>  "name": "recipients",<br/>  "type": "array",<br/>  "description": "The recipients that the email should be drafted for (should be a list of email addresses)"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "email_title",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The title of the email draft"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "email_body",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The body of the email draft"<br/>\}</code></pre>
## Portia Search Email Tool
**Tool ID:** portia::search_email_tool<br/>**Tool description:** Searches for emails in the user's inbox.<br/>**Usage notes:**<br/><br/>**Output schema:** <pre><code>[<br/>  Portia_Search_Email_Tool(query: 'string') -> dict,<br/>  dict: The email search results. These provide limited metadata for fetching full details of the emails (just message ID and thread ID).<br/>]</code></pre>**Args schema:** <pre><code>\{<br/>  "name": "query",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The query to search for emails. This supports Gmail search syntax (e.g. 'from:jane@example.com' or 'subject:meeting')."<br/>\}</code></pre>
## Portia Send Draft Email Tool
**Tool ID:** portia::send_draft_email_tool<br/>**Tool description:** Sends a previously drafted email with the email title, body and recipientsindicated in the draft. Required a draft id which is obtained from the DraftEmailTool.<br/>**Usage notes:**<br/><br/>**Output schema:** <pre><code>[<br/>  Portia_Send_Draft_Email_Tool(draft_id: 'string') -> str,<br/>  str: ID of the email sent<br/>]</code></pre>**Args schema:** <pre><code>\{<br/>  "name": "draft_id",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The id of the draft email as returned by the DraftEmailTool tool"<br/>\}</code></pre>
## Portia Send Email Tool
**Tool ID:** portia::send_email_tool<br/>**Tool description:** Sends an email to the recipients indicated. Should not be used with the draft email tool.<br/>**Usage notes:**<br/><br/>**Output schema:** <pre><code>[<br/>  Portia_Send_Email_Tool(recipients: 'array', email_title: 'string', email_body: 'string') -> dict,<br/>  dict: Output of the email sent<br/>]</code></pre>**Args schema:** <pre><code>\{<br/>  "name": "recipients",<br/>  "type": "array",<br/>  "description": "The recipients that the email should be sent to (should be a list of email addresses)"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "email_title",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The title of the email to be sent"<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "email_body",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The body of the email to be sent"<br/>\}</code></pre>
## Portia Google People Search Contacts Tool
**Tool ID:** portia::google_people_search_contacts_tool<br/>**Tool description:** Finds the most relevant matching contacts.<br/>**Usage notes:**<br/><br/>**Output schema:** <pre><code>[<br/>  Portia_Google_People_Search_Contacts_Tool(search_term: 'string') -> dict[str, list[dict[str,str]]],<br/>  A list of contacts<br/>]</code></pre>**Args schema:** <pre><code>\{<br/>  "name": "search_term",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The term to search for in the contacts"<br/>\}</code></pre>
## Portia Google Sheets Get Spreadsheet Tool
**Tool ID:** portia::google_sheets_get_spreadsheet_tool<br/>**Tool description:** Get a spreadsheet from Google Sheets.<br/>**Usage notes:**<br/><br/>**Output schema:** <pre><code>[<br/>  Portia_Google_Sheets_Get_Spreadsheet_Tool(spreadsheet_id: 'string') -> dict,<br/>  dict: Information about the spreadsheet. This is a structured response with a hierarchy including sheets and cells.<br/>]</code></pre>**Args schema:** <pre><code>\{<br/>  "name": "spreadsheet_id",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The ID of the spreadsheet to get."<br/>\}</code></pre>
## Portia Google Sheets Get Values for Spreadsheet Tool
**Tool ID:** portia::google_sheets_get_values_for_spreadsheet_tool<br/>**Tool description:** Get values or content for a spreadsheet from Google Sheets.<br/>**Usage notes:**<br/><br/>**Output schema:** <pre><code>[<br/>  Portia_Google_Sheets_Get_Values_for_Spreadsheet_Tool(spreadsheet_id: 'string', range: 'string') -> dict,<br/>  dict: Information about the spreadsheet. This is a structured response that contains the values of the cells in the spreadsheet.<br/>]</code></pre>**Args schema:** <pre><code>\{<br/>  "name": "spreadsheet_id",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The ID of the spreadsheet to get."<br/>\},<br/>\{<br/>  "name": "range",<br/>  "type": "string",<br/>  "description": "The range of the spreadsheet to get."<br/>\}</code></pre>