docs/product/Extend and run tools/Intro to tools.md, before:

---
sidebar_position: 1
slug: /intro-to-tools
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Introduction to tools
Understand tools at Portia and add your own.
:::tip[TL;DR]
- Tools are used by LLMs as part of their response to indicate that a particular software service or data store is required to fulfil a user's query.
- We represent a tool with the `Tool` class (<a href="/SDK/portia/tool" target="_blank">**SDK reference ↗**</a>). The LLM parses the tool properties, namely its name, description, input and output schemas to determine whether the tool is relevant to its response and how to invoke it.
:::

## Tools at Portia
A tool is a natural language wrapper around a data source or software service that the LLM can point to in order to accomplish tasks beyond its inherent capabilities. As a simple example, an LLM could respond to the user query `email avrana@kern.ai and tell her that spiders are now sentient` by suggesting a call to the email sending service wrapped in the `send_email` tool.

We represent a tool with the `Tool` class (<a href="/SDK/portia/tool" target="_blank">**SDK reference ↗**</a>). Let's look at the `weather_tool` provided with our SDK as an example:
```python title="weather_tool.py"
"""Tool to get the weather from openweathermap."""
import os
import httpx
from pydantic import BaseModel, Field
from portia.errors import ToolHardError, ToolSoftError
from portia.tool import Tool, ToolRunContext


class WeatherToolSchema(BaseModel):
    """Input for WeatherTool."""

    city: str = Field(..., description="The city to get the weather for")


class WeatherTool(Tool[str]):
    """Get the weather for a given city."""

    id: str = "weather_tool"
    name: str = "Weather Tool"
    description: str = "Get the weather for a given city"
    args_schema: type[BaseModel] = WeatherToolSchema
    output_schema: tuple[str, str] = ("str", "String output of the weather with temp and city")

    def run(self, _: ToolRunContext, city: str) -> str:
        """Run the WeatherTool."""
        api_key = os.getenv("OPENWEATHERMAP_API_KEY")
        if not api_key or api_key == "":
            raise ToolHardError("OPENWEATHERMAP_API_KEY is required")
        url = (
            f"http://api.openweathermap.org/data/2.5/weather?q={city}&appid={api_key}&units=metric"
        )
        response = httpx.get(url)
        response.raise_for_status()
        data = response.json()
        if "weather" not in data:
            raise ToolSoftError(f"No data found for: {city}")
        weather = data["weather"][0]["description"]
        if "main" not in data:
            raise ToolSoftError(f"No main data found for city: {city}")
        temp = data["main"]["temp"]
        return f"The current weather in {city} is {weather} with a temperature of {temp}°C."
```

Here are the key points to look out for:
- All properties of a tool are parsed by the LLM to determine whether that tool is salient to a user's query and should therefore be invoked in response to it.
- The `args_schema` property describes the tool inputs. This is important to help the LLM understand what parameters it can invoke a tool with.
- The `output_schema` property describes the expected output of the tool. This helps the LLM know what to expect from the tool and informs its sequencing decisions for tool calls as well.
- Every tool has a `run` function which is the actual tool implementation. The method always takes `ToolRunContext` which is contextual information implicitly passed by Portia. We will look into this more deeply in a future section (<a href="/manage-end-users" target="_blank">**Manage execution context ↗**</a>). The only thing to note now is that you have to include this argument and always import the underlying dependency.

:::note[Track tool calls in logs]
You can track tool calls live as they occur through the logs by setting `default_log_level` to DEBUG in the `Config` of your `Portia` instance (<a href="/manage-config#manage-logging" target="_blank">**Manage logging ↗**</a>).
:::

Commit message:

[POR-1306] Added a note on tool summarisation and some cleanup (#97)
* [POR-1306] Added a note on tool summarisation and some cleanup

* fix comment

docs/product/Extend and run tools/Intro to tools.md, after:

---
sidebar_position: 1
slug: /intro-to-tools
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Introduction to tools
Understand tools at Portia and add your own.
:::tip[TL;DR]
- Tools are used by LLMs as part of their response to indicate that a particular software service or data store is required to fulfil a user's query.
- We represent a tool with the `Tool` class (<a href="/SDK/portia/tool" target="_blank">**SDK reference ↗**</a>). The LLM parses the tool properties, namely its name, description, input and output schemas to determine whether the tool is relevant to its response and how to invoke it.
:::

## Tools at Portia
A tool is a natural language wrapper around a data source or software service that the LLM can point to in order to accomplish tasks beyond its inherent capabilities. As a simple example, an LLM could respond to the user query `email avrana@kern.ai and tell her that spiders are now sentient` by suggesting a call to the email sending service wrapped in the `send_email` tool.

We represent a tool with the `Tool` class (<a href="/SDK/portia/tool" target="_blank">**SDK reference ↗**</a>). Let's look at the `weather_tool` provided with our SDK as an example:
```python title="weather_tool.py"
"""Tool to get the weather from openweathermap."""
import os
import httpx
from pydantic import BaseModel, Field
from portia.errors import ToolHardError, ToolSoftError
from portia.tool import Tool, ToolRunContext


class WeatherToolSchema(BaseModel):
    """Input for WeatherTool."""

    city: str = Field(..., description="The city to get the weather for")


class WeatherTool(Tool[str]):
    """Get the weather for a given city."""

    id: str = "weather_tool"
    name: str = "Weather Tool"
    description: str = "Get the weather for a given city"
    args_schema: type[BaseModel] = WeatherToolSchema
    output_schema: tuple[str, str] = ("str", "String output of the weather with temp and city")

    def run(self, _: ToolRunContext, city: str) -> str:
        """Run the WeatherTool."""
        api_key = os.getenv("OPENWEATHERMAP_API_KEY")
        if not api_key or api_key == "":
            raise ToolHardError("OPENWEATHERMAP_API_KEY is required")
        url = (
            f"http://api.openweathermap.org/data/2.5/weather?q={city}&appid={api_key}&units=metric"
        )
        response = httpx.get(url)
        response.raise_for_status()
        data = response.json()
        if "weather" not in data:
            raise ToolSoftError(f"No data found for: {city}")
        weather = data["weather"][0]["description"]
        if "main" not in data:
            raise ToolSoftError(f"No main data found for city: {city}")
        temp = data["main"]["temp"]
        return f"The current weather in {city} is {weather} with a temperature of {temp}°C."
```

Here are the key points to look out for:
- All properties of a tool are parsed by the LLM to determine whether that tool is salient to a user's query and should therefore be invoked in response to it.
- The `args_schema` property describes the tool inputs. This is important to help the LLM understand what parameters it can invoke a tool with.
- The `output_schema` property describes the expected output of the tool. This helps the LLM know what to expect from the tool and informs its sequencing decisions for tool calls as well.
- Optionally, you can override the `should_summarize` property to determine whether the tool output should be summarised. When this setting is turned on, it uses an additional LLM call to populate the summary field in the step's output of the plan run object.
- Every tool has a `run` function which is the actual tool implementation. The method always takes `ToolRunContext` which is contextual information implicitly passed by Portia. We will look into this more deeply in a future section (<a href="/manage-end-users" target="_blank">**Manage execution context ↗**</a>). The only thing to note now is that you have to include this argument and always import the underlying dependency.

:::note[Track tool calls in logs]
You can track tool calls live as they occur through the logs by setting `default_log_level` to DEBUG in the `Config` of your `Portia` instance (<a href="/manage-config#manage-logging" target="_blank">**Manage logging ↗**</a>).
:::
